We trained the Cu NN potential using the DeePMD-kit package.31,55 The smooth version of the deep potential model was adopted, with a cutoff radius of 6.0 Å. To remove the discontinuity introduced by the cutoff, the 1/r term in the network construction is smoothly switched-off by a cosine shape function from 1.0 to 6.0 Å. The filter (embedding) network has three layers with (25, 50, and 100) nodes/layer and the fitting net is composed of three layers, with 240 nodes each. The network is trained with the ADAM optimizer,99 with an exponentially decaying learning rate from 1.0 × 10−3 to 5.0 × 10−8. The batch size was chosen as 4. The pre-factors of the energy and the force terms in the loss function change during the optimization process from 1 to 10 and from 1,000 to 1, respectively. The final model used for the production run was trained for 10.0 × 106 steps (see the supplementary material, Fig. S1).

The choice of the training dataset is a crucial step in the training of an NN potential. For this reason, we used the configurations collected along the DFT MD simulations to train a first “guess” Cu NN potential and we then used it to run several DPMD simulations for the different surfaces at different temperatures. This allowed us to explore a larger portion of the configurational space accessible in the temperature range of interest (500–700 K) and to efficiently extract new configurations to add to the training dataset, further enriching the NN potential. This active learning protocol follows the same procedure introduced by Deringer and Csányi56 and later implemented in the DeepMD software package by Zhang et al.57 Here, the criterion used to select new configurations is based on the agreement on the forces’ predictions made by an ensemble of four NN potentials, which have been trained on the same reference dataset but with different initial weights. We measured the model deviation as the maximum (over the force components) of the standard deviation on the forces predicted by such an ensemble of NN potentials. Whenever the model deviation for one configuration was in the range of [27–240 × 10−3] eV/Å, the corresponding structure was included in the new training dataset. The iterative process continues until when no new configurations are visited so that the NN potential can be considered “complete” for the sampled conditions. A total of 10 000 configurations were used for the training, and the final root mean square errors of the NN potential on the testing set are equal to 1.0 meV/atom for the energy and 40 meV/Å for the force.

To verify that the use of ∼100
 atom surface environment patches (accounting up to the ∼4−5
th neighbor) for the training allows providing a NN potential that is robust and complete (e.g., free from spurious finite-size effects), we also performed additional tests using larger surface patches (⁠∼600
 atoms) for the training. Our tests demonstrated that the deviations in the forces and energies thus estimated are systematically found within the training-testing errors, confirming, thus, the robustness of the approach adopted for the study of such systems and of the obtained NN potential.


