The DFT database needed to train the Cu NN potential was generated extracting configurations along ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) trajectories of small Cu systems. Simulations were performed using the PWscf code of Quantum ESPRESSO. In these calculations, Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange–correlation density functional93 forces were used to propagate the nuclear dynamics. Preliminary tests demonstrated that this functional provides a reliable representation of the metal surface, free of empirical corrections, and constitutes an ideal compromise between accuracy and computational cost. Moreover, the same approach was also demonstrated as reliable for other metals, e.g., for gold and silver surfaces.94 Ultrasoft Rappe-Rabe-Kaxiras-Joannopoulos (RRKJ) pseudopotentials95 replaced explicit core-valence electron interactions, while electron density and wavefunctions were expanded in plane-waves with energy cutoffs of 220 and 50 Ry, respectively. Occupation was treated by the cold smearing technique of Marzari et al. with a Gaussian spreading of 0.01 Ry. The Brillouin zone was sampled using a 2 × 2 × 2 Monkhost–Pack k-point grid for the bulk structure while a 2 × 2 × 1 k-point grid was used for the slab models.

Convergence against cutoff energy, Monkhost–Pack sampling, and occupation was tested, and the setup described was chosen as the best compromise between feasibility and accuracy. The AIMD simulations were carried out with a time step of 1.0 fs in a constant volume and temperature (NVT) ensemble using the stochastic velocity rescaling thermostat of Bussi et al.98 In order to span a larger portion of the configurational space, we simulated the systems at temperatures ranging between 500 and 700 K.

The AIMD-simulated systems include both bulk and surface structures. The bulk was modeled by a periodically repeated super-cell of size 7.1638 × 7.1638 × 7.1638 Å containing 32 atoms. For surface calculations, four slabs models were used to construct the (100), (110), (111), (211), and (210) copper surfaces. Slabs with a different number of atomic layers were built and a vacuum layer was set in the z direction. The first two bottom Cu layers were kept fixed during optimization and AIMD simulations.
